---
layout: post
title: A Means to an End
description: |
  What mean best suites an estimator.
image: /assets/img/Mean-post/mean.png
noindex: true
---

As data scientist we often need to estimate a value in order to answer a certain business question.
In most cases we get a data set, and the value that we wish to estimate is the mean and so the sample mean is a good choice for an estimator.

However, the arithmetic mean is not always the best choice for all the cases. 
There are also the geometric mean and the harmonic mean that can be used.

But before we get into the difference between all these means and what is the best choice for different cases I would like to start from the top and ask a more fundamental questions - what is an estimator?

Well, a good definition that I found states:
> An estimator is a statistic that estimates some fact about the population. 
> You can also think of an estimator as the rule that creates an estimate.

If we take this and apply it to what we started with:
Given the data set and the business question, we wish to construct the rule that will answer the business question form the data.

Lets consider several examples and see which means fits best for each case

1. A particle travels a certain distance _x_ in a certain velocity _v_ in time _t_ and we wih to estimate the next particle velocity.
Given a sample of particle velocities we wish estimate the mean velocity.

In this case we $$ \beta $$

2. In another case a particle breaks down  or dissolves after _t_ time and 
--

The important thing to recognize is that all of these means are simply the arithmetic mean in disguise.

The important characteristic in identifying which (if any!) of the three common means (arithmetic, geometric or harmonic) is the "right" mean is to find the "additive structure" in the question at hand.

In other words suppose we're given some abstract quantities x1,x2,…,xn, which I will call "measurements", somewhat abusing this term below for the sake of consistency. Each of these three means can be obtained by (1) transforming each xi into some yi, (2) taking the arithmetic mean and then (3) transforming back to the original scale of measurement.

Arithmetic mean: Obviously, we use the "identity" transformation: yi=xi. So, steps (1) and (3) are trivial (nothing is done) and x¯AM=y¯.

Geometric mean: Here the additive structure is on the logarithms of the original observations. So, we take yi=logxi and then to get the GM in step (3) we convert back via the inverse function of the log, i.e., x¯GM=exp(y¯).

Harmonic mean: Here the additive structure is on the reciprocals of our observations. So, yi=1/xi, whence x¯HM=1/y¯.

In physical problems, these often arise through the following process: We have some quantity w that remains fixed in relation to our measurements x1,…,xn and some other quantities, say z1,…,zn. Now, we play the following game: Keep w and z1+⋯+zn constant and try to find some x¯ such that if we replace each of our individual observations xi by x¯, then the "total" relationship is still conserved.

The distance–velocity–time example appears to be popular, so let's use it.

Constant distance, varying times

Consider a fixed distance traveled d. Now suppose we travel this distance n different times at speeds v1,…,vn, taking times t1,…,tn. We now play our game. Suppose we wanted to replace our individual velocities with some fixed velocity v¯ such that the total time remains constant. Note that we have
d−viti=0,
so that ∑i(d−viti)=0. We want this total relationship (total time and total distance traveled) conserved when we replace each of the vi by v¯ in our game. Hence,
nd−v¯∑iti=0,
and since each ti=d/vi, we get that
v¯=n1v1+⋯+1vn=v¯HM.
Note that the "additive structure" here is with respect to the individual times, and our measurements are inversely related to them, hence the harmonic mean applies.

Varying distances, constant time

Now, let's change the situation. Suppose that for n instances we travel a fixed time t at velocities v1,…,vn over distances d1,…,dn. Now, we want the total distance conserved. We have
di−vit=0,
and the total system is conserved if ∑i(di−vit)=0. Playing our game again, we seek a v¯ such that
∑i(di−v¯t)=0,
but, since di=vit, we get that
v¯=1n∑ivi=v¯AM.
Here the additive structure we are trying to maintain is proportional to the measurements we have, so the arithmetic mean applies.

Equal volume cube

Suppose we have constructed an n-dimensional box with a given volume V and our measurements are the side-lengths of the box. Then
V=x1⋅x2⋯xn,
and suppose we wanted to construct an n-dimensional (hyper)cube with the same volume. That is, we want to replace our individual side-lengths xi by a common side-length x¯. Then
V=x¯⋅x¯⋯x¯=x¯n.
This easily indicates that we should take x¯=(xi⋯xn)1/n=x¯GM.

Note that the additive structure is in the logarithms, that is, logV=∑ilogxi and we are trying to conserve the left-hand quantity.

New means from old

As an exercise, think about what the "natural" mean is in the situation where you let both the distances and times vary in the first example. That is, we have distances di, velocities vi and times ti. We want to conserve the total distance and time traveled and find a constant v¯ to achieve this.

Exercise: What is the "natural" mean in this situation?